8.30.2011

*Baker Farm*. HDT talks about the trees in the neighborhood, listing
them by name, and ending by calling them "shrines". The chapter changes
tack during a rainstorm, when he finds cover in what he at first thinks
is an abandoned hut. He meets the Field family, poor Irish, supported by
father John's work as a bogger, who earns 10 dollars an acre for digging
up meadowland. 

Thoreau thinks he's getting the short end of the deal as this work will
cost him much more than 10 bucks a month. 

I think some of the costs may be real--bogging is hard work and wears
out heavy boots and clothing. Other costs, certainly, are the neglected
opportunities Field and his family will miss by trying to pursue wealth
the old -fashioned way, through hard and meaningless work that limits
freedom. He notes Mrs. Field, saying she still thinks she can improve
her life.

I detect a condescension to the poor Irish here and I probably reacted
to it when I last read *Walden* about 10 years ago. HDT was blaming the
poor for their problems. Of course I had no problem when HDT blames the
bourgeoisie for *their* problems, because somehow I see the poor as
different, with fewer resources to help themselves. This is equally
condescending, of course, treating the poor as helpless. 

Regardless of the cause of the poverty, the proper interpretation seems
to be that anyone has agency, that anyone can do things to improve their
life and escape poverty. Not by making more money, of course, but by
living simply. When you redefine poverty as the lack of things that are
really important in life, you can escape it this way.

Of course, this kind of secular renunciation is quietist. That's another
argument.
 
- - - - -

Thoreau's quietism is problematic. While he talks about a renunciation
of worldly economic activity to all for more important pursuits, he
leaves open what those pursuits should be. Having more time for your
thoughts may mean having more time for writing and publishing
anti-slavery lectures. Like John Brown, HDT was  an ascetic in pursuit
of something and not having to worry about spending all your time
tending your farm freed him up to write things like "A Plea for Captain
John Brown".

Notice from August 30 1856: 
> If you would really take a position outside the street and daily life
> of men, you must have deliberately planned your course, you must have
> business which is not your neighbors' business, which they cannot
> understand. For only absorbing employment prevails, succeed, takes up
> space, occupies territory, determines the future of individuals and
> states, drives Kansas out of your head and actually and permanently
> occupies the only desirable and free Kansas against all border
> ruffians.

I ran into this notice directly after wondering about HDT's "quietism".
John Field and his family, once they figured out how to live free, could
plan a deliberately course of business outside of the ken of their
neighbors. It would probably not be abolition, if I understand the 19th
century Irish immigrant, but something else as important. 

- - - - -
HDT's August 30 notice continues with the cranberry harvest. He gathers
cranberries from a bog. Sometime before he told the owner about the
berries  and the farmer, not seeing a profit to be made, gave it up to
HDT and his annual expeditions. An excerpt: 

> I am the only person in the township who regards them or knows of
> them, and I do not regard them in the light of their pecuniary value.
> I have no doubt I felt richer wading there with my two pockets full,
> treading on wonders at every step, than any farmer going to marked
> with a hundred bushels which he has raked or hired to be raked. _I got
> further and further from the town every moment, and my good genius
> seemed [to] have smiled on me leading me hither, and then the suddenly
> came out clear and bright, but it did not warm my feet.

Here he's found his "absorbing employment", far from the street and
daily life of men.


