**#7**

I read *Walden* paragraph by paragraph, each a distinct unit, almost a compact essay. They don't follow in any necessary order, though the chapter organization of *Walden* groups them thematically. The argument doesn't progress between paragraphs toward a clear conclusion. The paragraphs circle around a nominal topic, approaching the matter from different angles of attack. Thoreau doesn't develop arguments, he states them over and over in slightly different form. In a way, the first and last paragraphs of a chapter, and every paragraph in between, contain the whole meaning of the chapter.

_ _ _

Shanley shows that the original draft of *Walden* was written straight through between 1848 and 1849. The pieces of the original draft were added to, shuffled, revised, and reconstructed in at least six more drafts before publication. *Walden* never was drafted as a whole, except for the publisher's fair copy (now lost), but paragraphs and bits of paragraphs were moved around and built up with material from the journals, while the last half of the book was written using the journals of 1851-1854 (as well as earlier material). I picture the revision as moving paragraph-sized blocks of text around, something that would have been done more easily with index cards, polishing them and finding the best fit.

- - -

The introduction to the Dover edition of _The heart of Thoreau's Journals_ calls Thoreau the greatest Amercian practitioner of the _pensee_ form. The _pensee_ is in essence a thought expressed in literary form, as short as a sentence, as long as a page. Blaise Pascal was first with his great _Pensees_. Afterwards, the form became common in French letters. Thoreau, through inspiration or inclination, integrated the _pensee_ form into his journal, and ultimately into _Walden_, given the book its unique flavor.

- - - 

This structure afforded Thoreau the opportunity for the startling wordplay found throughout _Walden_. Each paragraph is almost a setup for some dazzling aphorism based on polysemy or a pun or whatever, as, for example, in the railroad sleeper paragraph. _Walden_ is almost a matrix for a series of aphorisms.





