<p>Sarah Epps wrote about the iPad and "curated computing"&nbsp; in <a
href="http://is.gd/kfMSl">Ars Technica</a> last year:</p>
<p>There is something very significant about the iPad beyond how many<br
/> units it will sell: it's changing how we think about the PC. The
iPad<br /> creates a use case for a device that doesn't do everything
your laptop<br /> does, targeted at a consumer that uses devices more
for consumption<br /> than production. The iPad ushers in a new era of
personal computing<br /> that we call "Curated Computing"&mdash;a mode
of computing where choice is<br /> constrained to deliver less complex,
more relevant experiences. Let me<br /> repeat that, because it's the
essence of the Curated Computing<br /> experience: less choice; more
relevance.</p>
<p>In a curated environment, freedom and openness are exchanged for
convenience and relevance.</p>
<p><a href="http://is.gd/kfNO4">Wired</a>, on musical curation replacing
music criticism:</p>
<p>The fact that your favorite MP3 blog mentions something at all is
more<br /> important than what they say about it, because you can then
download<br /> or stream the song and decide for yourself.</p>
<p>W. T. Quick is a sf writer whom I think is mostly a hack. However. In
the<a href="http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/pl.cgi?ANLGMAY89"> May,
1989</a> issue of <em>Analog</em> he published a short story titled
"Bank Robbery", about a man who makes  his living reading the vast
amount of freely distributed essays, books,  articles available on the
"net", and writing up a periodical review for  sale to interested
readers who came to trust his judgment totally. The  man curated text,
as we would call it.</p>
<p>While I didn't think the story had much literary value I was struck
with the core concept and in the last 20 years I've only seen one
confirmation after another of Quick's vision. This is probably the way
science fiction thinks it works.</p>
